BERKELEY CAMPUS CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT
General Overview
The University of California at Berkeley is a community of scholars committed to maintaining an
environment that encourages personal and intellectual growth. It is a community with high standards and
high expectations for those who choose to become a part of it, including established rules of conduct
intended to foster behaviors that are consistent with a civil and educational setting. Members of the
University community are expected to comply with all laws, University policies and campus regulations,
conducting themselves in ways that support a scholarly environment. In this context, faculty are guided by
The Faculty Code of Conduct, Section 015 of the Academic Personnel Manual, and students by the
Berkeley Campus Code of Student Conduct, articulated here.
Accompanying the Berkeley Campus Code of Student Conduct (Code) is an established process to
determine if a student has violated the Code and to respond appropriately when violations are sustained.
Students alleged to have violated the Code are given an opportunity to meet with a member of the Center
for Student Conduct staff to discuss the incident in question. Most often complaints are resolved
informally through discussions with Center for Student Conduct staff. The Center for Student Conduct
may conduct an investigation and/or gather further information relevant to the complaint. Students may
also provide any additional information to clarify the facts. If the investigation shows that there was no
Code violation, the case may be dropped or a Notification may be issued (see Case Not Pursued, section
II.C.1). If the investigation yields evidence of a Code violation, the Center for Student Conduct will
propose a resolution and students may be given the opportunity to resolve the case informally. If the
student chooses not to accept informal resolution or the Center for Student Conduct determines it
necessary, the case will be handled formally by either an administrative hearing or panel hearing.
Once the formal process begins, students can expect to be notified of the date and time for a hearing. In a
panel hearing the panel will be composed of faculty, staff, and student members of the Committee on
Student Conduct, presided over by an Independent Hearing Officer who will make determinations with
regard to procedural and evidentiary issues. In an administrative hearing the Independent Hearing Officer
will preside alone. The process for either hearing is the same. Center for Student Conduct staff will
present witnesses and information related to the case and students will have the opportunity to share
information to be reviewed, present witnesses and information on their behalf and ask questions of the
campus’ witnesses. The hearing body will determine whether it is more likely than not that students
violated the Code, and if so, will recommend an appropriate sanction to the Dean of Students. If a sanction
is imposed, students have the right to appeal their case to the Vice Chancellor of Student Affairs.
Students are expected to speak for themselves. They may, however, seek the advice of another person to
assist them in either the formal or informal process. In the event that the student chooses not to participate
in the hearing process, the hearing process will continue in the student’s absence.
Potential conduct sanctions are described in Section VI. Sanctions in both the formal and informal
processes are intended to enforce the Code of Student Conduct and to inform students about appropriate
behavior within the community, help them learn from mistakes, and discourage future violations of the
rules of conduct. Sanctions may include, but are not limited to, such elements as reflective writing
assignments, community service, letters of apology, counseling, additional coursework, or restitution.

I. STUDENT RIGHTS

Students charged with violations of the Berkeley Campus Code of Student Conduct (Code) are advised of
their due process rights when they meet with Center for Student Conduct staff, and throughout the process,
they are entitled to the following procedural protections:
A. Notice of Conduct Charges
If the Center for Student Conduct determines that a student will be charged with violations of the
Code, a notice is emailed to the student within seven (7) days after a complaint is filed or initiated by
Student Conduct (unless the seven day period is extended by the Independent Hearing Officer (see
Procedures and Timelines, Section II.A.4). The Alleged Violation Letter identifies those sections of
the Code the student is charged with violating and includes a detailed description of the facts
supporting the charge(s) (see Notice of Charges, section 2.C.2.a).
The University may bring charges against a former student, for offenses committed while a student,
within six months after termination of student or student organization status. This limitation does not
apply to cases that involve academic dishonesty or fraud affecting the acquisition of a degree, over
which the University maintains indefinite jurisdiction.
B. Presumption of Innocence
It is presumed that a student charged with a violation of the Code is not responsible for such violations
unless the student admits responsibility or it is determined otherwise following a hearing (see Standard
of Proof, section II.D.2.d.5).
C. Choosing Not to Participate
The conduct process works best when students and staff collaboratively come to an informal resolution
of cases. Students may choose not to participate in the resolution of their charges. In this situation the
Center for Student Conduct will proceed to resolve the charge without the participation of the student
(see Response to Charges, section II.C.2.b.2). When a hearing is held without the student’s
participation, the decisions of the Independent Hearing Officer, the hearing body and the Dean of
Students or his/her designee will have the same force and effect as if the student had participated.
Students may also choose to remain silent during any portion of the conduct process and no inference
will be drawn from the decision of the student to remain silent.
D. Hearing
Students charged with violations of the Code are encouraged to fully explore informal resolution of
their case. They may, however, elect to have formal resolution of the case through an administrative or
panel hearing (see The Hearing, section II.D.2.d).
E. Appeal
Students have a right to appeal the decisions of the hearing body and the Dean of Students or his/her
designee. See Appeal of the Hearing Body and Dean of Students’ Decisions (section II.E) for a
description of the appeals process.
F. Advisors
Students may be accompanied by one advisor at any stage of the process, at the student’s own expense.
An advisor’s role in the student conduct process is to provide students with assistance in preparing for
and conducting meetings and hearings. In meetings prior to the commencement of a formal hearing
process, students are encouraged to fully participate but may be assisted by an advisor who, with the
written permission of the student, may interact directly with Center for Student Conduct staff and may
meet on behalf of the student to seek an informal resolution. In a formal hearing, the student may
consult with the advisor throughout the proceedings. A charged student may request that the advisor
be allowed to make arguments and/or question witnesses on the student’s behalf during the hearing,
and the Independent Hearing Officer will decide whether or not to grant that request after considering:
whether granting the request will promote the fair, efficient and timely completion of the hearing; the
ability of the charged student to effectively present the case; the complexity and seriousness of the
case; the advisor’s familiarity with and willingness to abide by applicable procedures; cultural or
language barriers that prevent the students from expressing themselves during the hearing; and such
other factors as may be relevant in the particular case. The Independent Hearing Officer may limit the
speaking role of the advisor during the hearing if necessary to prevent disruption.

II. CONDUCT PROCEDURES
A. Administration of the Code of Conduct
1. The Center for Student Conduct
The Center for Student Conduct is responsible on behalf of the campus for intake of complaints
alleging violations of the Code, investigation of alleged violations, issuing charges of Code
violations, participating in the informal resolution process, and presentation of conduct violation
cases at formal hearings. The Center for Student Conduct administers complaints of both
academic and non-academic violations of the Code. Faculty members may resolve academic
violations separately or in conjunction with the Center for Student Conduct (see Faculty Informal
Resolution of Academic Violations, section II.D.1.c).
2. The Independent Hearing Officer
The Independent Hearing Officer is responsible for resolving procedural matters described in
section II.D.2.c.2 of this Code, administering the formal hearing process, presiding over formal
hearings, and deciding all procedural and evidentiary matters related to formal hearings.
3. Advisory Review Committee
The Center for Student Conduct may seek the advice of an Advisory Review Committee with
respect to pursuing or charging a case, appropriate recommended sanctions or sanctioning
pursuant to an informal resolution. Hearing bodies may also seek the advice of an Advisory
Review Committee for the purpose of determining an appropriate sanction. Advisory Review
Committees will be formed on an as-needed basis from the members of the Committee on Student
Conduct and will include three members: a faculty chair, one student and one staff member.
Advisory Review Committee members responsible for making decisions related to pursuing or
charging a case will not be seated on the hearing panel for that case.
4. Procedures and Timelines
Each case is handled individually and, while due process is always provided, every procedure
outlined in the Code may not be used in a particular case. All deadlines and time requirements in
this document may be extended for good cause as determined by the Independent Hearing Officer
or upon the agreement of the Center for Student Conduct and the charged student. Requests for
extensions of deadlines must be made in writing to the Independent Hearing Officer, and the
Independent Hearing Officer will notify both parties whether or not the extension is granted, and if
an extension is granted, the specific date of the new deadline or event.
B. Filing a Complaint and Investigation of Allegations
1. Filing a Complaint
Most cases begin with a complaint alleging that a student has committed an academic or nonacademic violation of the Code. Any member of the faculty or staff, a student or any other person
may file a complaint with the Center for Student Conduct within sixty (60) days of the date the
reporting party knew or should reasonably have known of the alleged violation unless law or an
external agency requires that information be withheld. In the event that the information must be
withheld the complaint must be submitted within thirty (30) days from the date the information
can or could have been released. Complaints alleging violation of certain campus policies, such as
the Sexual Harassment Policy, must be filed within time limits prescribed in those policies. The
Center for Student Conduct may also independently investigate information concerning student
misconduct from any source, such as police and/or press reports, even where no formal complaint
has been filed.
2. Sexual Harassment Complaints
In cases involving sexual harassment and/or gender discrimination, the investigation of specific
allegations will be conducted by the Title IX Compliance Officer or other officer designated by
the Chancellor in accordance with the Berkeley Campus Policy on Sexual Harassment and
Complaint Resolution Procedures or the Student Grievance Procedure. In cases involving a
complaint of rape or sexual assault, the investigation of specific allegations will be directed by the
Title IX Compliance Officer and conducted by the Center for Student Conduct. The Title IX
Compliance Officer will decide whether sexual assault and sexual harassment cases should be
pursued by the Center for Student Conduct.
3. Complaints Relating to University Housing
Students residing in University-owned and/or operated housing facilities who violate the
Residential Code of Conduct may be adjudicated under the process outlined in the Residential
Code of Conduct or referred directly to the Center for Student Conduct.
C. Investigation of Misconduct
The Center for Student Conduct will conduct an investigation of complaints of alleged misconduct and
determine whether sufficient information exists to proceed with a conduct process. One of the
following actions will be taken within seven (7) days after the date that the Center for Student Conduct
receives a complaint, unless the length of the investigation period is extended to a later specific date by
the Independent Hearing Officer (notice does not need to be provided to the student of the application
for or issuance of such an extension):
1. Case Not Pursued
a) Insufficient Information or Evidence
If the Center for Student Conduct determines that there is insufficient information or
insufficient evidence to support an allegation of violation of the Code, charges against the
responding student will not be pursued.
b) Notification
As an alternative to pursuing charges against a student who has allegedly violated the Code,
the Center for Student Conduct may issue a written notification to a student that the student’s
alleged behavior, if it had actually occurred, would have violated University policy, campus
regulations or the Code and would be subject to the conduct process. The Notification is not a
determination that the allegations against the student are true, does not result in a conduct
record, and therefore is not appealable. However, the prior alleged behavior as detailed in the
Notification may be introduced in a subsequent conduct process for the purpose of
establishing that the student was warned that such behavior violates University policy,
campus regulations or the Code.
2. Case Charged
a) Notice of Charges
If the Center for Student Conduct determines that there is sufficient information to support the
allegation(s), the student will be notified of the charge(s) under the Code. The written notice
of charges, also referred to as the Alleged Violation Letter, includes: notice to the student of
the University Policy or campus regulation(s) the student is alleged to have violated; a brief
summary of the incident including, wherever possible, the date, time, and location of the
alleged offense; a specific statement of the sanction(s) that may be applied if the student
chooses to not take part in the conduct process; notice of the student’s right to be
accompanied by an advisor at any stage of the conduct proceedings at the student’s own
expense; notice of the opportunity to meet with a Center for Student Conduct staff member to
discuss resolution of the charges pursuant to Informal Resolution of Allegations (section
II.D.1 of this Code); notice of the student’s right to a hearing; notice of the student’s right to
request a copy of the student’s own conduct file; notice of the procedure for requesting a time
extension; and notice of the Center for Student Conduct’s intent to continue the conduct
process in the student’s absence unless the student meets with staff or returns the signed letter
indicating the student’s choice of resolution.
The Alleged Violation Letter also informs the student that unless the student contacts the
Center for Student Conduct in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the Alleged
Violation Letter, the student may be found responsible for the conduct violation described in
the Alleged Violation Letter and the listed sanction(s) may be assigned.
When appropriate, the Center for Student Conduct may place a student on interim suspension
by issuing a Notice of Interim Suspension (see Interim Suspension, section VI.105.08).
Notice to student organizations will be addressed to the president, principal officer, student
group signatory or other students designated by the group to act as an agent on behalf of the
group.
b) Response to Charges
(1) Contacting the Center for Student Conduct
The student must respond to the Center for Student Conduct via email within seven (7)
days of receipt of the Alleged Violation Letter regarding the student’s intent to participate
in the conduct process. As long as the student contacts the Center for Student Conduct in
writing by the indicated deadline, the Center for Student Conduct shall not automatically
impose any sanction(s). Students should return the signed letter indicating their choice of
the following options: request a meeting with Center for Student Conduct staff to discuss
an informal resolution (see Informal Resolution of Allegations, section II.D.1); accept the
proposed sanction(s) or alternative resolution process offered in the Alleged Violation
Letter; request a panel hearing; or request an administrative hearing conducted by the
Independent Hearing Officer (see Formal Hearing Processes, section II.D.2).
(2) No Response
If the student does not contact the Center for Student Conduct in writing within seven (7)
days of receipt of the Alleged Violation Letter, and the sanction proposed in the Alleged
Violation Letter is not suspension or dismissal, then, within ten (10) days, the Center for
Student Conduct may find that the student is responsible for the charges described in the
Alleged Violation Letter and may impose the sanction(s) recommended in the letter.
If the student does not contact the Center for Student Conduct in writing within seven (7)
days, and the sanction proposed in the Alleged Violation Letter is suspension or
dismissal, then the case will be forwarded to the Independent Hearing Officer who,
within ten (10) days, will conduct an administrative hearing, determine responsibility,
and if necessary, assign sanctions. By failing to reply, the student has waived any right to
appear at the administrative hearing, but the Independent Hearing Officer may permit the
student to participate in the hearing upon the request of the student. If the Independent
Hearing Officer finds that a violation does not justify the sanction(s) recommended by
the Center for Student Conduct, the Independent Hearing Officer may impose a less
severe sanction.
D. Resolution of Charged Cases
Students may choose to resolve their cases either informally through meetings with Center for Student
Conduct staff or formally through a hearing process. If a student chooses, or if charges are not
resolved informally, then charges will be resolved by a hearing. In all cases, a student may request a
copy of the student’s own conduct record from the Center for Student Conduct. The Center for
Student Conduct must provide the requested copy within three (3) days of such requests. The release
of such information may be subject to limitations imposed by state and federal law (see the Berkeley
Campus Policy Governing Disclosure of Information from Student Records).
1. Informal Resolution of Allegations
a) Student Conduct Informal Resolution
Students charged with Code violations are offered the opportunity to meet with the Center for
Student Conduct to resolve their case without a formal hearing. If a student elects this option,
the meeting will take place within ten (10) days of the student’s response to the Alleged
Violation Letter. Cases may be resolved informally if the charged student, at any time prior to
the hearing, admits violating the Code as charged or otherwise accepts an informal resolution.
Informal resolutions generally include sanctions as described in Conduct Sanctions (section
VI of this Code) combined with enhancements such as community service, additional
educational requirements, written assignments, etc. Upon accepting an informal resolution, a
student waives the right to a hearing and any further appeal. If the Student Conduct Officer
and the student cannot reach a mutually acceptable agreement regarding sanctions, then the
Student Conduct Officer will inform the Independent Hearing Officer that informal resolution
was unsuccessful, and the Independent Hearing Officer will schedule a hearing to resolve the
charges. The student may elect to have the case resolved through a panel hearing or an
administrative hearing (see Formal Hearing Processes, section II.D.2).
b) Additional Informal Resolution Options
In some cases, Center for Student Conduct staff may suggest to the student that additional
options for informal resolution may be appropriate. These options could include, but are not
limited to, mediation, peer review boards, and restorative justice processes. If the student
agrees that such informal resolution is appropriate, then the Center for Student Conduct may
make appropriate referrals. If the informal resolution is successful, the charges may be
resolved consistent with (a), immediately above, or may be dismissed in the discretion of the
Center for Student Conduct. In these situations, the Independent Hearing Officer shall
suspend the hearing timeline while such efforts are pursued, and shall set a hearing date
promptly upon notice from the student or from the Center for Student Conduct that informal
resolution is unlikely to resolve the charge.
Subject to the agreement of both the Center for Student Conduct and the charged student,
charges may be submitted for Alternative Dispute Resolution. Alternative Dispute Resolution
refers to procedures for resolving disputes by means other than the formal student conduct
processes. This method of resolution utilizes a third party facilitator or mediator who is
neutral and does not make decisions for the parties. Instead, the facilitator or mediator creates
a format for discussion, holds parties to ground rules, helps organize the dispute into
manageable issues, and guides brainstorming for possible solutions. If the parties are not able
to create an agreement, then the case is referred back to the Center for Student Conduct for
resolution, and to the Independent Hearing Officer for the setting of a hearing schedule.
c) Faculty Resolution of Academic Violations
(1) Generally
Faculty members may choose to informally resolve incidents of academic misconduct or
may refer such complaints to the Center for Student Conduct. All faculty dispositions
will be reported to the Center for Student Conduct, either for adjudication (as described
in Resolution of Charged Cases, section II.D) or for record-keeping purposes. If the
student has a prior history of misconduct at the University, the Center for Student
Conduct may administer the matter after consultation with the instructor or faculty
member.
(2) Initial Investigation
Instructors or faculty members attempting to settle academic matters will discuss
allegations of academic misconduct with the student directly and, if appropriate, others
involved in the suspected academic violation. If the student maintains innocence of the
violation and the instructor or faculty member determines that no such violation occurred,
he or she may cease investigating the complaint.
(3) Faculty Determined Disposition
If, upon discussion, the student admits the violation, the instructor may impose an
appropriate academic sanction after confirming with the Center for Student Conduct that
the student has no prior history of academic misconduct. If the student does not admit to
the academic misconduct or consent to the sanction proposed by the faculty member, the
matter will be administered through the Center for Student Conduct. Academic sanctions
may only be imposed by faculty members and include but are not limited to resubmitting
assignments and grade adjustments. Faculty members may not impose sanctions as listed
in Conduct Sanctions (section VI of this Code). All faculty dispositions will be reported
to the Center for Student Conduct for record-keeping purposes.
(4) Referral to the Center for Student Conduct
If the instructor or faculty member is unable to, or elects not to resolve the complaint
with the student, he or she will report the alleged violation to the Center for Student
Conduct.
If the student, in discussion with the instructor or faculty member, maintains innocence of
the alleged violation and the instructor or faculty member believes a violation did occur,
he or she will report the alleged violation to the Center for Student Conduct. If a student
is found responsible for academic violations of the Code, academic sanctions may be
imposed by the faculty member (see Faculty Determined Disposition, section II.D.1.c.3)
and non-academic sanctions may be imposed by the Center for Student Conduct or the
hearing body (see Conduct Sanctions, section VI).
When an instructor or faculty member reports an alleged academic violation to the Center
for Student Conduct, a course grade of "I" (Incomplete) will be noted on the grade sheet
pending resolution of the allegation. When the alleged violation is reported to the Center
for Student Conduct, it will be handled as outlined in section II.D, Resolution of Charged
Cases.
(5) Notice of Final Disposition
The instructor or faculty member will, in all cases, be informed of the disposition of the
allegations by the Center for Student Conduct to the extent permitted by applicable law
and University policy.
2. Formal Hearing Processes
Students may choose to have their cases resolved through either a panel hearing or an
administrative hearing. The student must indicate a choice of a panel or administrative hearing in
writing, either by responding to the Alleged Violation Letter or following the student’s
preliminary meeting with the Center for Student Conduct. If the student requests a hearing but
does not choose between a panel or administrative hearing, then the Independent Hearing Officer
will schedule a panel hearing. The hearing will be scheduled by the Independent Hearing Officer
to occur at least fifteen (15) days from, but not later than twenty-five (25) days from, the date that
the student was given as the deadline for responding to the Alleged Violation Letter. If the student
elected to meet with the Center of Student Conduct in response to the Alleged Violation Letter,
then the hearing will be scheduled by the Independent Hearing Officer to occur at least five (5)
days from, but not later than fifteen (15) days from, the end of the ten (10) day period provided for
the informal resolution meeting. The Independent Hearing Officer will provide written notice to
the Student Conduct Office and to the charged student of the date, time and location of the
hearing. The Independent Hearing Officer may determine, for good cause stated in writing by the
student or by the Center for Student Conduct, that the date of the hearing should be continued to a
later specific date or that the time or place of the hearing should be changed. The Independent
Hearing Officer will provide reasonable notice to the parties of any changes to the date, time or
location of the hearing.
a) Panel Hearing
Panel hearing cases are presented to hearing panels comprised of members of the Committee
on Student Conduct, which act as the hearing body and make a determination regarding the
alleged violation(s). Panel hearings are presided over by the Independent Hearing Officer.
Both the student and the Center for Student Conduct will have an opportunity to present
witnesses for questioning (see Presentation of Information, section II.D.2.d.1).
b) Administrative Hearing
Administrative hearings are conducted by the Independent Hearing Officer, who shall act as
the hearing body and make a determination regarding the alleged violation(s). In all other
respects, administrative hearings are conducted in the same manner as panel hearings.
c) Pre-Hearing Process
(1) Exchange of Information
The student may request a copy of the student’s own disciplinary file at any time in order
to prepare for a hearing. The Center for Student Conduct must provide a copy within
three (3) days of such requests.
The Independent Hearing Officer will establish a procedure for the parties to exchange
information prior to the formal hearing. The exchange will occur no later than five (5)
days prior to the hearing, unless the Independent Hearing Officer sets an earlier date for
the exchange. The parties will exchange copies of all information relevant to the incident
to be shared at the hearing and a list of possible witnesses.
The release of information pursuant to this section may be subject to limitations imposed
by state and federal law (see Berkeley Campus Policy Governing Disclosure of
Information from Student Records).
The Independent Hearing Officer may exclude any information from the hearing that a
party fails to include in its exchange of information or fails to exchange according to
these procedures.
(2) Pre-Hearing and Procedural Matters
The Independent Hearing Officer will review and decide any procedural matters either in
advance of or during the hearing as necessary and appropriate. These matters include but
are not limited to: limits on each side’s time for presentation, exclusion of duplicated or
irrelevant matters, or order of presentation of information. The Independent Hearing
Officer will make such decisions based upon the specific circumstances of the case in
order to promote the fair and efficient resolution of the hearing.
The Independent Hearing Officer will rule on and remedy any violations of a charged
student’s procedural rights with regard to the Conduct process and this Code. If the
Independent Hearing Officer determines that a violation of the student’s procedural rights
has occurred, the Independent Hearing Officer may take whatever actions are necessary
with respect to the pending case to remedy any harm resulting from the violation,
including but not limited to exclusion of evidence or dismissal of some or all of the
charges.
Prior to the hearing, if a charged student believes the information or evidence is not
sufficient to conclude that it is more likely than not that the student committed the
violation(s), and/or if the student believes that the alleged violation is not within the
jurisdiction of the Code, the student may ask the Independent Hearing Officer to dismiss
the charge.
The Independent Hearing Officer may establish procedures for submission and
determination of all pre-hearing matters.
d) The Hearing
(1) Presentation of Information
Hearings are not conducted according to formal rules of procedure and evidence. The
members of the hearing panel, the Independent Hearing Officer, the charged student and
the Center for Student Conduct shall all be allowed an opportunity to question each
witness. Once the hearing body has completed its questioning of a witness, the Center
for Student Conduct and the charged student will each be given the opportunity to ask
any remaining questions. The student must choose one of the following methods for all
follow-up questioning: either 1) all follow-up questions are asked by the student and the
Conduct Officer, or 2) all follow-up questions are submitted by the student and the
Center for Student Conduct to the panel in writing as they arise during the course of the
hearing. No later than the start of the hearing, the student will elect the questioning
method in writing. The student and the Center for Student Conduct will each be given an
opportunity to make both opening and closing statements.
(2) Question and Answer
No person is required to provide information against one’s own self in any conduct
proceeding. Information shared will normally not be admissible unless the opposing
party is afforded a reasonable opportunity to confront and ask questions of the witness. It
is the responsibility of the student to ensure that the student’s witnesses are present.
However, if a witness is unavailable or declines to attend, the Independent Hearing
Officer will determine whether written or other recorded statements of such witness will
be admitted.
(3) All Information Presented at the Hearing
The hearing body’s decision will be based only upon information introduced at the
hearing. Neither the charged student nor the Center for Student Conduct may
communicate information regarding the merits of the case or its disposition to the hearing
body without the other party being afforded an opportunity to respond.
(4) Choosing Not to Appear
Unless good cause is shown, if the student does not appear at the hearing, the hearing
body may find the student responsible for some or all of the charges and may apply some
or all of the recommended sanctions against the student. The hearing body’s decision
will be based only upon the information available at the hearing, and that information
may be introduced informally. If the Center for Student Conduct does not appear at the
hearing, the Independent Hearing Officer may dismiss the charges against the student.
(5) Standard of Proof
The Center for Student Conduct bears the burden of proving the charges. The standard of
proof for all hearings is a preponderance of evidence. A preponderance of evidence is
defined as “more likely to be true than not.”
(6) Admissibility of Information
Admissible information is the sort upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely
in the conduct of serious affairs, and is not restricted to evidence admissible under the
strict rules of evidence of a court of law. The hearing body will not consider information
that it determines has been obtained by fundamentally unfair means.
(7) Prior Conduct Record
The hearing body will take into account the student’s prior conduct record, if any, only
for purpose of determining an appropriate sanction unless the information is considered
to be relevant to the charges.
(8) Information in Cases of Sexual Assault or Rape
The privacy interests of the parties will be considered by the hearing body in making
decisions about the introduction of information. In cases involving allegations of sexual
assault or rape, information regarding an individual's sexual history and practices will be
considered only when it is determined that the information is directly relevant to the
claims and essential to fair resolution of the matter.
e) Hearing Body’s Recommendation and Dean of Students’ Decision
The hearing body is responsible for determining, based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, whether it is more likely than not that the charged student violated the Code with
respect to each charged violation. If the hearing body determines that it is more likely than
not that the student violated the Code, it shall also recommend a sanction. Where the hearing
is conducted before a hearing panel, the Independent Hearing Officer shall not participate in
the panel’s deliberations or the drafting of its report, nor shall the Independent Hearing
Officer make recommendations to the panel regarding what decision the panel should make.
The hearing body’s decision will be documented in a report that includes a summary of the
student’s behavior and a determination of whether the student has been found responsible or
not of each alleged violation of the Code of Student Conduct. The hearing body will also
recommend to the Dean of Students or his/her designee specific sanctions to be imposed if it
finds the student in violation of the Code. The hearing body will deliver a copy of the report
to the Independent Hearing Officer within ten (10) days of the hearing, and the Independent
Hearing Officer will promptly send a copy by email to the student, the Dean of Students, and
the Center for Student Conduct.
Based upon the findings of the hearing body and any recommendation for sanctioning, the
Dean of Students or his/her designee will determine the sanction to be imposed. A written
statement of the Dean of Students’ or his/her designee’s final decision on sanctioning will be
sent by email to the charged student within ten (10) days of receiving the hearing body’s
report.
f) Recommendation to Revoke Degree Previously Conferred
(1) If the hearing body determines that a student has committed an act of academic
misconduct or fraud affecting the acquisition of the student’s degree, the Dean of
Students or his/her designee may forward a recommendation that the degree be
revoked to the Committee on Courses of the Academic Senate. A Notice of Intent to
Recommend Revocation of Degree will be sent via email to the charged student with
the written statement of decision.
(2) The Dean of Students’ or his/her designee’s recommendation will not be forwarded
to the Committee on Courses until expiration of the time to file a written appeal (see
Appeal of the Hearing Body and Dean of Students’ Decisions, section II.E) or until
determination that the appeal by the Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs or his/her
designee has been completed.
(3) The Committee on Courses makes the final decision as to revocation of the degree.
This determination is not appealable to the Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs.
g) Consolidation of Hearings
Cases in which more than one student is charged with violating the same Code section(s) and
which depend on common evidence may, at the discretion of the Independent Hearing
Officer, either be considered jointly in a single consolidated hearing or be assigned to
separate, individual hearings. All charged students must waive their rights to confidentiality
before the hearing may be consolidated. (See Berkeley Campus Policy Governing Disclosure
of Information from Student Records.) When an individual student is alleged to have violated
the Code in separate incidents, the cases may be resolved in a single hearing process when
appropriate as determined by the Independent Hearing Officer.
h) Record of the Hearing
The Independent Hearing Officer will make an official recording of the hearing, a copy of
which must be made available to the charged student upon request. The student may, at the
student’s own expense, use the services of a professional stenographer during the hearing. In
some instances the recording may have to be transcribed before it can be released (see
Berkeley Campus Policy Governing Disclosure of Information from Student Records).
i) Hearings Generally Closed to the Public
In order to protect the privacy of the student, hearings are closed to the public unless an
exception is granted by the Independent Hearing Officer upon written request by the student.
The student may request an open hearing by submitting a written request for a public hearing
along with a waiver of confidentiality to the Independent Hearing Officer within a reasonable
time in advance of the scheduled hearing date. If the request for an open hearing is denied,
the Independent Hearing Officer will provide a rationale in writing. In a consolidated
hearing, all charged students must waive their rights to confidentiality and to a closed hearing
before the hearing may be opened to the public. In all hearings, charged students may have a
non-participating observer present, in addition to the advisor. The Independent Hearing
Officer may close any hearing to the public when necessary to maintain order or to protect the
rights of the participants including the privacy rights of student witnesses or others. In cases
concerning allegations of sexual misconduct or other allegations involving important privacy
interests, the Independent Hearing Officer may close a hearing upon determining that the
privacy rights of a party or witness may otherwise be jeopardized.
E. Appeal of the Hearing Body and Dean of Students’ Decisions
Appeals of the hearing body and the Dean of Students’ or his/her designee’s decisions must be
addressed in writing to the Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs or his/her designee.
1. Timeline for the Appeal
Within ten (10) days of the emailing of the written notification of the Dean of Students’ or his/her
designee’s final decision, either the charged student or the Center for Student Conduct may submit
a written appeal to the Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs or his/her designee. When such an
appeal is timely submitted by a party, the Vice Chancellor or his/her designee must promptly send
a copy of the appeal to the other party. Within five (5) days of receiving the copy, the other party
may submit a written response to the Vice Chancellor or his/her designee.
2. Suspension of Sanctions Before the Appeal
The filing of a timely appeal suspends the imposition of sanctions until the appeal is decided, but
interim action may be taken as determined by the Dean of Students or his/her designee. Grades or
degrees may be withheld pending conclusion of the appeal.
3. Basis for Appeal
An appeal must be based on newly discovered evidence that was not available at the time of the
hearing, significant procedural error, or upon other evidence or arguments which, for good cause,
should be considered.
4. Final Determination of Appeal
The Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs or his/her designee will make the final determination of
all cases appealed under these regulations. Except in cases where the appeal is based upon newly
discovered evidence, the Vice Chancellor or his/her designee will review the record of the hearing
and will not consider information that was not part of that record, other than the student's prior
conduct record, if any. The Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs or his/her designee may approve,
reject, or modify the decision and sanction in question, or require that the original hearing be reopened. Where the appeal is based upon new information, the case may be referred back to the
hearing body for further consideration. The action taken will be communicated in writing to the
student and the Center for Student Conduct within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the appeal and
related documents.

III. DEFINITIONS
A. Student
1. The term "student" for the purposes of this Code means an individual for whom the
University maintains student records and who:
a) is enrolled in or registered with an academic program of the University;
b) has completed the immediately preceding term and is eligible for reenrollment, including
the recess periods between academic terms; or
c) is on an approved educational leave or other approved leave status, or is on filing-fee
status.
2. The Code also applies to:
a) applicants who become students, for offenses committed as part of the application
process;
b) applicants who become students, for offenses committed on campus and/or while
participating in University-related events or activities that take place following a student's
submittal of the application through the student’s official enrollment; or
c) former students for offenses committed while a student.
B. Notice
Wherever written notice to the student is required by the Code, it will be conclusively presumed to
have been furnished if the notice is sent to the student by email to the email address most recently filed
with the Registrar’s office. It will be conclusively presumed that written notice to a student
organization has been furnished if the notice is sent by email to the email address provided by the
student organization to the Center for Student Leadership or sponsoring department.
C. Student Organization
Unless otherwise stated, wherever this Code refers to “student” the same also applies to student
organizations. “Student organization” means any group or organization of students of the University
of California, Berkeley that has obtained official recognition as a student organization from an office
or department of the campus. Communications with student organizations will be directed to the
president, principal officer, student group signatory or other students designated by the group to act as
an agent on behalf of the group.
D. Days
The term “day” is defined as a full business day and does not include Saturdays, Sundays, legal
holidays or University designated administrative holidays. With the mutual consent of the student, the
Center for Student Conduct and the hearing body, hearings may be held outside of normal business
hours, on Saturdays, Sundays or administrative holidays.
E. Committee on Student Conduct
1. Composition of Committee
The Committee on Student Conduct is the body of individuals who serve on hearing panels and
consists of faculty, staff and both graduate and undergraduate students. One undergraduate
student may be nominated by the recognized student government and one graduate student may be
nominated by the Graduate Assembly. Additional students are solicited from the community at
large for appointment to the committee. Staff members are nominated by the Vice Chancellor for
Student Affairs. Faculty members are nominated by the Academic Senate Committee on
Committees. All members of the committee are appointed by the Chancellor or his/her designee.
2. Hearing Panels
Hearing panels are generally comprised of five members of the Committee on Student Conduct
and include: one faculty member, one undergraduate student, one graduate student, one staff
member and the faculty chair. Hearings may be heard by a quorum of three members of the
Committee on Student Conduct so long as the faculty chair and one student are included on the
panel. If the case involves an academic violation, at least two of the individuals hearing the case
must be members of the faculty.
3. Duration of Appointment
Unless otherwise specified by the Chancellor, appointments to the Committee on Student Conduct
will be made in the spring for terms beginning the following August 1. Faculty and staff
appointments to the Committee normally last for a term of two years and student appointments to
the Committee normally last for a term of one year, all commencing on August 1, and ending on
July 31 or upon the appointment of the new committee members, whichever is later. Members
may be appointed for successive terms.
F. Independent Hearing Officer
The Independent Hearing Officer is appointed by the Vice Chancellor for Student Affairs.
Because it is intended that the Independent Hearing Officer operate independently of the Center
for Student Conduct, neither shall report to the other nor to the direct supervisor of the other. The
Independent Hearing Officer shall not participate in communications regarding the merits of a
pending case with one party without the participation of the other party, except that the
Independent Hearing Officer may consult the Office of Legal Affairs for legal advice.
IV. JURISDICTION
A. Generally
These provisions govern student conduct on, or as it relates to University property, or at official
University functions and University-sponsored programs conducted away from the campus.
University property is defined for purposes of this Code as all land, buildings, facilities or other
grounds or structures, or any item in possession of or owned, used, maintained or controlled by the
University or designated by the campus as subject to these policies, including the International House.
University property also includes computers and network systems owned, maintained or controlled by
the University or funded by University budgets or designated by the campus as subject to these
policies.
B. Off-Campus Conduct
Student conduct that occurs off University property is subject to the Code where it a) adversely affects
the health, safety, or security of any other member of the University community, or the mission of the
University, or b) involves academic work or any records or documents of the University.
In determining whether or not to exercise jurisdiction over such conduct, the Center for Student
Conduct will consider the seriousness of the alleged offense, the risk of harm involved, whether the
victim(s) are members of the campus community and/or whether the off-campus conduct is part of a
series of actions that occurred both on and off University property.
C. Conduct on Other UC Campuses and Off-Campus Sponsored Sites
A student at one campus of the University who is accused of violation of University policies or campus
regulations on another campus of the University, at an official function of that campus, or at any site at
which a University function is sponsored, shall be subject to the disciplinary procedures of either the
former or the latter campus as agreed by designees of both campuses. The imposition of any
recommendations for disciplinary sanctions arising from these procedures must be reviewed and
approved by both campuses before the sanctions are imposed.
V. GROUNDS FOR DISCIPLINE
The Chancellor may impose discipline for the commission or attempted commission (including aiding or
abetting in the commission or attempted commission) of the following types of violations by students (as
specified by University Policy 100.00, http://www.ucop.edu/ucophome/coordrev/ucpolicies/), as well as
such other violations as may be specified in campus regulations:
102.01 Academic Misconduct
All forms of academic misconduct including but not limited to cheating, fabrication, plagiarism, or
facilitating academic dishonesty.
See Appendix II of this Code for further explanation of academic misconduct.
102.02 Other Dishonesty
Other forms of dishonesty including but not limited to fabricating information, bribery, furnishing false
information, or reporting a false emergency to the University.
102.03 Forgery
Forgery, alteration, or misuse of any University document, record, key, electronic device, or
identification.
102.04 Theft
Theft of, conversion of, destruction of, or damage to any property of the University, or any property of
others while on University premises, or possession of any property when the student had knowledge or
reasonably should have had knowledge that it was stolen.
102.05 Electronic Resources
Theft or abuse of University computers and other University electronic resources such as computer and
electronic communications facilities, systems, and services. Abuses include (but are not limited to)
unauthorized entry, use, transfer, or tampering with the communications of others; interference with
the work of others and with the operation of computer and electronic communications facilities,
systems, and services; or copyright infringement (for example, the illegal file-sharing of copyrighted
materials).
Use of University computer and electronic communications facilities, systems, or services that violates
other University policies or campus regulations.
Please refer to the UC Electronic Communications Policy
(http://www.ucop.edu/ucophome/policies/ec/) and Digital Copyright Protection at UC
(http://www.ucop.edu/irc/policy/copyright.html) for the University's position on digital copyright.
102.06 Unauthorized Conduct
Unauthorized entry to, possession of, receipt of, or use of any University services; equipment;
resources; or properties, including the University’s name, insignia, or seal.
102.07 University Housing
Violation of policies, regulations, or rules governing University-owned, -operated, or -leased housing
facilities or other housing facilities located on University property.
102.08 Physical Abuse
Physical abuse including but not limited to rape, sexual assault, sex offenses, and other physical
assault; threats of violence; or other conduct that threatens the health or safety of any person. (See
Berkeley Campus Student Policy and Procedures Regarding Sexual Assault and Rape or the Berkeley
Campus Policy on Sexual Harassment and Complaint Resolution Procedures in Appendix I for further
information.)
Title IX website: http://equity.chance.berkeley.edu/titleix.shtml
102.09 Sexual, Racial, and Other Forms of Harassment (Interim)
Sexual, racial, and other forms of harassment, defined as follows:
Harassment is defined as conduct that is so severe and/or pervasive, and objectively offensive, and that
so substantially impairs a person's access to University programs or activities, that the person is
effectively denied equal access to the University's resources and opportunities on the basis of the
person’s race, color, national or ethnic origin, alienage, sex, religion, age, sexual orientation, gender
identity, marital status, veteran status, physical or mental disability, or perceived membership in any of
these classifications.
Student Employees
When employed by the University of California, and acting within the course and scope of that
employment, students are subject to the University of California Policy on Sexual Harassment.
Otherwise, Section 102.09, above, is the applicable standard for harassment by students.
Both student and/or employee sexual harassment, please refer to the University of California
Procedures for Responding to Reports of Sexual Harassment.
102.10 Stalking
Stalking behavior in which a student repeatedly engages in a course of conduct directed at another
person and makes a credible threat with the intent to place that person in reasonable fear for the
person’s safety, or the safety of the person’s family; where the threat is reasonably determined by the
University to seriously alarm, torment, or terrorize the person; and where the threat is additionally
determined by the University to serve no legitimate purpose.
102.11 (Rescinded, UCOP, October 2009)
102.12 Hazing
Participation in hazing or any method of initiation or pre-initiation into a campus organization or other
activity engaged in by the organization or members of the organization at any time that causes, or is
likely to cause, physical injury or personal degradation or disgrace resulting in psychological harm to
any student or other person. (See Statement on Hazing in Appendix I for further information).
102.13 Obstruction of University Activities
Obstruction or disruption of teaching, research, administration, disciplinary procedures, or other
University activities.
102.14 Disorderly Conduct
Disorderly or lewd conduct.
102.15 Disturbing the Peace
Participation in a disturbance of the peace or unlawful assembly. (See Berkeley Campus Regulations
Implementing University Policies for further information.)
102.16 Failure to Comply
Failure to identify oneself to, or comply with the directions of, a University official or other public
official acting in the performance of the official’s duties while on University property or at official
University functions; or resisting or obstructing such University or other public officials in the
performance of or the attempt to perform their duties.
102.17 Controlled Substances
Unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, use, or sale of, or the attempted
manufacture, distribution, dispensing, or sale of controlled substances, identified in federal and state
law or regulations.
102.18 Alcohol
Manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, use, or sale of, or the attempted manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, or sale of alcohol that is unlawful or otherwise prohibited by, or not in
compliance with, University policy or campus regulations.
102.19 Destructive Devices
Possession, use, storage, or manufacture of explosives, firebombs, or other destructive devices.
102.20 Weapons
Possession, use, storage or manufacture of a firearm or other weapon.
102.21 Disciplinary Actions
Violation of the conditions contained in the terms of a disciplinary action imposed under this Code or
campus regulations.
102.22 Notice of Emergency Suspension
Violation of the conditions contained in a written Notice of Emergency Suspension issued pursuant to
Appendix I (Emergency Suspension) of this Code or violation of orders issued during a declared state
of emergency (see University Policy section 52.00,
http://www.ucop.edu/ucophome/coordrev/ucpolicies/aos/uc50.html).
102.23 Course Materials
Selling, preparing, or distributing for any commercial purpose course lecture notes or video or audio
recordings of any course unless authorized by the University in advance and explicitly permitted by the
course instructor in writing. The unauthorized sale or commercial distribution of course notes or
recordings by a student is a violation of these Policies whether or not it was the student or someone
else who prepared the notes or recordings.
Copying for any commercial purpose handouts, readers or other course materials provided by an
instructor as part of a University of California course unless authorized by the University in advance
and explicitly permitted by the course instructor or the copyright holder in writing (if the instructor is
not the copyright holder).
102.24 Terrorizing Conduct
Conduct, where the actor means to communicate a serious expression of intent to terrorize, or acts in
reckless disregard of the risk of terrorizing, one or more University students, faculty, or staff.
'Terrorize' means to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or death, perpetrated by the actor or
those acting under the actor’s control. 'Reckless disregard' means consciously disregarding a
substantial risk. This section applies without regard to whether the conduct is motivated by race,
ethnicity, personal animosity, or other reasons. This section does not apply to conduct that constitutes
the lawful defense of oneself, of another, or of property.
102.25 Camping or Lodging
Camping or lodging on University property other than in authorized facilities.
102.26 Other Policies or Regulations
Violation of any other University policy or campus regulation.

VI. CONDUCT SANCTIONS
When a student is found in violation of University policies or campus regulations, any of the following
sanctions or combination thereof may be imposed. Any sanction imposed should be appropriate to the
violation, taking into consideration the context, previous violations, and seriousness of the violation.
Sanctions [for any violations of Section 102.00, Grounds for Discipline] may be enhanced where an
individual was selected because of the individual's race, color, national or ethnic origin, citizenship, sex,
religion, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, pregnancy, marital status, ancestry, service in the
uniformed services, physical or mental disability, medical condition, or perceived membership in any of
these classifications.
105.01 Warning/Censure
Written notice or reprimand to the student that a violation of specified University policies or campus
regulations has occurred and that continued or repeated violations of University policies or campus
regulations may be cause for further disciplinary action. A warning may be issued in instances of
deliberate and serious violations as well as for repeat, non-egregious violations.
105.01(a) Non-Reportable Warning
A warning could be in the form of a non-reportable warning, which is notice that subsequent
violations will result in more serious sanctions. A non-reportable warning may be issued when the
student’s action formally constitutes a violation, but the circumstances and degree of severity of
the action do not warrant the creation of a conduct record. Once issued, records of non-reportable
warnings are maintained only for in-house reference in case of subsequent violations.
105.01(b) Reportable Warning
A warning could be in the form of a reportable warning, which is notice, maintained as part of the
student’s conduct record.
105.02 [Rescinded May 17, 2002 per UCOP]
105.03 Disciplinary Probation
A status imposed for a specified period of time during which a student must demonstrate conduct that
conforms to University standards of conduct. Conditions restricting the student's privileges or
eligibility for activities may be imposed. Misconduct during the probationary period or violation of
any conditions of the probation may result in further disciplinary action, normally in the form of
Suspension or Dismissal. Disciplinary probation will typically be issued in response to more egregious
violations and recurring serious violations to communicate to the student that further violations will
most likely lead to temporary or permanent removal from campus.
105.04 Loss of Privileges and Exclusion from Activities
Exclusion from participation in designated privileges and activities for a specified period of time.
Violation of any conditions in the written Notice of Loss of Privileges and Exclusion from Activities,
or violation of University policies or campus regulations during the period of the sanction may be
cause for further disciplinary action, normally in the form of Probation, Suspension or Dismissal.
105.05 Suspension
Termination of student status at the campus for a specified period of time with reinstatement thereafter
certain, provided that the student has complied with all conditions imposed as part of the suspension
and provided that the student is otherwise qualified for reinstatement. Suspensions will typically be
issued in cases of extraordinarily serious first-time violations and for subsequent violations of a serious
degree after a warning or disciplinary probation has been administered. 	   Violation of the conditions of
Suspension or of University policies or campus regulations during the period of Suspension may be
cause for further disciplinary action, normally in the form of Dismissal.
105.06 Dismissal
Termination of student status for an indefinite period. Readmission to the University requires the
specific approval of the Chancellor of the campus to which a dismissed student has applied. Dismissal
will typically be used in cases that cannot be appropriately addressed with a suspension because the
recurring nature of multiple violations or the extraordinary caliber of a single violation demonstrates
that the student does not deserve an opportunity to return to campus. Readmission after dismissal may
be granted only under exceptional circumstances.
105.07 Exclusion from Areas of the Campus or from Official University Functions
Exclusion of a student as part of a disciplinary sanction from specified areas of the campus or other
University-owned, -operated, or -leased facilities, or other facilities located on University property, or
from official University functions, when there is reasonable cause for the University to believe that the
student's presence there will lead to physical abuse, threats of violence, or conduct that threatens the
health or safety of any person on University property or at official University functions, or other
disruptive activity incompatible with the orderly operation of the campus.
105.08 Interim Suspension
Exclusion from classes, from other specified activities, from areas of the campus, or from the entire
campus, as set forth in a Notice of Interim Suspension issued by the Center for Student Conduct. A
student will be restricted only to the minimum extent necessary and when there is reasonable cause to
believe that the student's participation in University activities or presence at specified areas of the
campus will lead to physical abuse, threats of violence, or conduct that threatens the health or safety of
any person on University property or at official University functions, or other disruptive activity
incompatible with the orderly operation of the campus. A student placed on interim suspension will be
given prompt notice of the reason for the interim suspension and the duration of the interim
suspension. Any interim suspension will be reviewed by the Chancellor or his/her designee within
twenty-four hours of issuance by the Center for Student Conduct. The student will be provided with
the opportunity for a prompt hearing before the Independent Hearing Officer regarding the merit of the
interim suspension. At the hearing, the Independent Hearing Officer may modify or cancel the interim
suspension. If an interim suspension is determined by the Independent Hearing Officer to have been
issued improperly, then the University will engage in reasonable efforts to assist an individual who has
been disadvantaged with respect to employment or academic status resulting from the suspension.
Notices of Interim Suspension and determinations regarding the validity of an Interim Suspension shall
not be maintained in a student’s conduct file nor used as evidence of the occurrence of a conduct
violation in a conduct hearing (except with regard to alleged violations of the interim suspension by the
student). The Center for Student Conduct will issue an Alleged Violation Letter concerning the
alleged conduct that led to the Notice of Interim Suspension within seven (7) days following the
issuance of the Notice of Interim Suspension. Failure of a student to comply with the requirements of
an interim suspension is a violation of this Code.
105.09 Restitution
A requirement for restitution in the form of reimbursement may be imposed for expenses incurred by
the University or other parties resulting from a violation of these policies. Such reimbursement may
take the form of monetary payment or appropriate service to repair or otherwise compensate for
damages. Restitution may be imposed on any student who alone, or through group or concerted
activities, participates in causing the damages or costs.
105.10 Revocation of Awarding of Degree
Subject to the concurrence of the Academic Senate, revocation of a degree obtained by fraud or other
academic dishonesty. Such revocation is subject to review on appeal by the Chancellor.
105.11 Other
Other disciplinary actions, such as monetary fines, community service, or holds on requests for
transcripts, diplomas, or other student records to be sent to third parties, as set forth in campus
regulations.
105.11(a) University Service
A designated number of hours of unpaid University service, performed under the direction of an
administrative officer of the Berkeley Campus.
105.11(b) Monetary fines
Monetary fines may be imposed.
105.11(c) Records Hold
A hold may be placed on transcripts and/or diploma(s) or other records as a sanction and/or until a
student satisfies the terms and conditions of any sanction imposed.
105.11(d) Deferral or Withholding of Degree
An academic degree may be deferred when disciplinary proceedings are pending or when a
student's full compliance with disciplinary sanctions is pending, or withheld when academic
dishonesty or fraud affected the acquisition of the student's degree (see Recommendation to
Revoke Degree Previously Conferred, section II.D.2.f, for further information regarding this
procedure).
105.11(e) Stay of Sanction
The imposition of any sanction may be held in abeyance pending future conduct.
105.11(f) Counseling
Appropriate counseling or other professional assistance including but not limited to psychological
counseling, drug and alcohol counseling, and anger management workshops may be required.
105.11(g) Other Actions
Other appropriate action, including, but not limited to, additional academic assignments.
105.11(h) Additional Student Organization Sanctions
1. In addition to the sanctions listed above, violations by student organizations may also result in
revocation of the organization's recognition or revocation of recognition of the organization's
officers.
2. A recognized student organization may be sanctioned where a member or members of the
organization violated the Code with the knowledge and consent of the organization's officers, or
acted in concert with other members of the organization.

VII. MISCELLANEOUS
A. Maintenance of Disciplinary Records
1. University Policy, State and Federal Law
Conduct case records and all supporting documentation will be maintained according to the
University policies and applicable State and Federal laws concerning maintenance and disclosure
of student records, protection of a student's right of privacy, and the disclosure of personal student
information.
2. Campus Policy Regarding Retention
The file of a student found in violation of campus regulations (including the transcripts or
recordings of the hearing) will be maintained by The Center for Student Conduct. Student
discipline records are confidential and are separate from the student’s academic record.
The Center for Student Conduct will retain student discipline records according to the following
schedule:
(a) In cases where the final disposition is dismissal from the University, denial or revocation of a
degree, and/or withdrawal of a diploma, the records will be retained indefinitely.
(b) Records which are subject to maintenance under the Campus Security Act (also known as the
Jeanne Clery Act) will be retained for seven (7) years from the date of the notice of final
disposition.
(c) Student discipline records in all other cases are retained for four (4) years from the date of the
notice of final disposition or until graduation (whichever comes first).
When there have been repeated violations of the Student Conduct Code, all student discipline
records pertaining to an individual student will be retained for four (4) years or graduation (seven
(7) years for cases which fall under the Clery Act) from the date of the final disposition in the
most recent case. Disciplinary records may be retained for longer periods of time or permanently,
if so specified in the sanction.
3. Posting on Transcripts
When, as a result of a violation of the Code of Student Conduct, a student is suspended, the fact
that suspension was imposed must be posted on the academic transcript for the duration of the
suspension. When a student is dismissed, the fact that dismissal was imposed must be posted on
the academic transcript permanently.
4. Expunging of Disciplinary Record
Disciplinary records may be expunged by the Dean of Students of his/her designee for good cause,
upon written request of a student who has a disciplinary record. Factors to be considered in
review of such petitions shall include:
(a) the person’s disciplinary record as a whole
(b) the conduct of the student subsequent to the violation
(c) the nature of the violation(s) and the severity of any damage, injury, or harm resulting from it.
Disciplinary records retained for less than 120 days or designated as “permanent” shall not be
expunged without unusual and compelling justification.
Expunged files will be so marked, shall not be kept with active disciplinary records, and shall not
leave any student with a disciplinary record.
B. Threats to Health and Safety/Disruptive or Illegal Activity
1. Threats to Health and Safety
In cases involving behavior that is willfully disruptive or presents a threat to the health or safety of
others, interim suspension or exclusion pursuant to California Penal Code Section 626 may be
invoked in addition to or instead of the initiation of conduct action (see Interim Suspension,
section 105.08, and Disruptive and Illegal Activity, section VII.B.2).
2. Disruptive and Illegal Activity
Independent of the procedures described above, the Berkeley Campus Chief of Police or other
designated officer may exclude disruptive students from the campus under the Berkeley Campus
Procedures for Implementing Section 626 of the State Penal Code. Such exclusions may be
ordered where there is reasonable cause to believe that the individual has engaged in an activity
which (1) willfully disrupts the orderly operation of the campus and (2) is illegal under criminal
statutes other than Section 626.4. (See Berkeley Campus Procedures for Implementing Section
626 of the State Penal Code for further information.)
C. Application of the Code
Conduct for violations of University policies or campus regulations may be imposed whether or
not such violations are also violations of law, and whether or not proceedings are or have been
pending in the courts involving the same acts. The proceedings described herein are separate and
distinct from criminal or civil proceedings which may arise from identical circumstances and
which apply to students as citizens at large. Whenever it is possible and reasonable to do so,
student conduct cases will be handled in an informal manner that encourages students to learn
from their experiences and be positive contributors to the community.
Students are responsible for informing themselves about their rights and responsibilities with
respect to the Code and cannot reasonably claim innocence of a violation of the Code on the
grounds of ignorance.
Complaints initiated prior to the adoption of the current version of this Code will be resolved
using the prior version of this Code unless the student elects to have the complaint resolved using
the current version of this Code.
D. Revisions of the Code
The Chancellor consults faculty, staff and students, including representatives of student
governments, in the revision of the Berkeley Campus Code of Student Conduct except when such
revisions result from changes to Universitywide policies or are specifically mandated by law. Any
member of the campus community may submit written proposals to change the provisions of this
Code to the Chancellor at any time. Prior to the adoption of a revised Code of Student Conduct, all
proposed modifications are submitted to the Office of the Assistant Chancellor for Legal Affairs
and to the Office of the President for review for consistency with Universitywide policies and the
law.
Copies of all campuswide and University policies referenced herein are available at online at
http://studentconduct.berkeley.edu.

APPENDIX I: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION
During a state of emergency, Chancellors or their designated representatives are empowered to impose
Emergency Suspension on any student, faculty member, or employee when there is a reasonable cause to
believe:
1. The individual has participated in a disturbance of the peace or unlawful assembly, or has acted in
violation of the campus emergency orders, has committed an act of physical violence or has threatened to
commit such an act, or has committed a theft or has damaged property; or
2. The individual's presence on campus will lead to violation of campus emergency orders, violence,
intimidation, damage to property, or other disruptive activity incompatible with the orderly operation of the
campus.
If Emergency Suspension is imposed by a designated representative of the Chancellor, such representative
shall immediately inform the Chancellor and submit a written report on the action to the Chancellor as soon
as is reasonably possible. The report must contain a description of the person suspended, including the
person's name and, if available, address and phone number, and a statement of the facts giving rise to the
suspension. If the Chancellor does not affirm the action of the designated representative within twenty-four
hours after being informed that the suspension has been imposed, the suspension will be deemed void and a
reasonable effort will be made to inform the person who was suspended that the suspension is void.
Any individual placed on Emergency Suspension will be given written confirmation of the suspension,
either by delivering it to the individual personally, by mailing it to the individual's last known address of
record or by emailing it to the individual’s last known email address of record. The confirmation will
inform the individual of the procedures by which the validity of the Emergency Suspension can be
appealed, including the opportunity to obtain a special hearing on the Emergency Suspension in accordance
with applicable campus procedures. If an individual is found to have been unjustifiably placed on
Emergency Suspension, the University is committed to a policy whereby reasonable efforts are taken to
assist an individual who has been disadvantaged in employment or academic status.
The outcome of the appeal will have no bearing on University conduct proceedings arising from the
behavior which gave rise to the Emergency Suspension.
Any individual placed under Emergency Suspension shall not, during the period of suspension, enter upon
specified areas of the campus or engage in specified activities, as set forth in the written Notice of
Emergency Suspension. The exclusion or restriction will be limited to the minimum extent necessary to
protect the health and safety of persons or property, or to maintain the orderly operation of the campus.
Violation of any condition set forth in the Notice of Emergency Suspension will subject the individual to
disciplinary proceedings based upon such violation.

APPENDIX II: ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT
This appendix provides students with a further explanation of different forms of academic misconduct.
This list is not exhaustive. Individual departments at the University of California, Berkeley may have
differing expectations for students, and therefore students are responsible for clarifying the standards and
expectations of their individual departments.
Cheating
Cheating includes fraud, deceit, or dishonesty in an academic assignment, or using or attempting to use
materials, or assisting others in using materials that are prohibited or inappropriate in the context of the
academic assignment in question.
Plagiarism
Plagiarism includes use of intellectual material produced by another person without acknowledging its
source.
False Information and Representation and Fabrication or Alteration of Information
Furnishing false information, failing to identify oneself honestly, fabricating or altering information and
presenting it as legitimate, or providing false or misleading information to an instructor or any other
University official in an academic context.
Theft or Damage of Intellectual Property
Sabotaging or stealing another person’s work, improper access to or electronically interfering with the
property of another person or the University, or obtaining a copy of an exam or assignment prior to its
approved release.
Alteration of University Documents
Forgery of an instructor’s signature, submitting an altered transcript of grades to or from another institution
or employer, putting one’s name on another individual’s work, or falsely altering a previously graded exam
or assignment.
Disturbances in the Classroom or Lab
Disturbances in a classroom or lab that serve to create an unfair academic advantage for oneself or
disadvantage for another member of the academic community.
